I've done exactly, old friend, but the book is doing better than I thought it was, especially after, you know, I knew that any place that assigned it to a professional Shakespeare scholar, old-style or neuter review, was going to publish vicious reviews.
So I got really nasty reviews in the Sunday Times Book Review.
I got nasty ones coming, I'm told, in the New York Review of Books and the Washington Post Book World.
I got a very nasty one in the Wall Street Journal.
And so it goes, why count up?
But you know, Nick, it doesn't make any difference.
The book is 12 on this week's bestseller list and 8 on next week's.
So these guys and girls are somehow doing my work for me.
What does this tell you, that a serious book like this can become a bestseller?
Well, that I don't know.
I thought I'd have to think about Nick.
The thing I was talking about tells me that there's a real split.
between people who teach Shakespeare and the general public.
But that's part of the general split between the collapse of our universities and, indeed, the real needs of our undergraduates.
But I don't want to start in on that because I've driven everybody blue in the face about that.
The other thing, well, Shakespeare, he's not regarded by the British as their national treasure, but the truth is he's ours.
I mean, from early 19th century America until now, nonstop,
He has been always the most popular author and the most popular playwright in America, and a staple of our education.
And we seem to have more concern with him today, including television, movies, etc.
But somehow we seem more to be a Shakespearean culture than we ever were before.
When you reflect that this somehow takes place in spite of the decline of deep and serious reading,
in spite of the triumph of the visual media, in spite of the degeneration of the academic faculties of literature, who are particularly atrocious on Shakespeare, who may reduce to, you know, just another Elizabethan Jacobean, are no better and no worse than anybody else.
And besides, in order to properly understand him, you must look at him through Foucault's lenses, or you must look at him through Derrida's lenses, or Karl Marx's lenses, or best of all through, I don't know,
Who's our reigning feminista?
Some Harrigan or other.
I don't pay much attention to them.
No, I don't pay much attention to them either, though they occasionally pay some nasty attention to me.
Why are you such a threat to them, do you think?
Interesting question.
Well, here I am, dear.
I'm 68 years old.
I'm like the unthinkable Molly Brown.
I've been getting, I've been publishing books for 42 years and getting nasty reviews for 42 years.
I've been teaching for forty-five years at Yale and eleven years now simultaneously at NYU, and I've announced to the presidents of both institutions that I intend to be carried out of my last class at one place or the other in a body bag some twenty odd years down the road.
And I simultaneously go around the country proclaiming that it's time to stop this nonsense, both on the right and on the left, and that I want to abolish tenure.
because I see no other way of saving the study of literature.
And, of course, that doesn't make me popular.
And I'm sick of ideology, and I know that the undergraduates everywhere are sick of ideology.
What can one say?
When you get this kind of a response, this kind of, I mean, works of literary criticism,
I mean, it's almost an oxymoron.
It's supposed to be bestsellers.
Well, but I've done it before.
You've done it before.
The Book of Jane was purely... Something resonates here.
Purely a work of literary criticism.
It was a bestseller.
The Western Canon was not a New York Times bestseller, but it made bestseller lists.
It was a national bestseller.
And now this one has immediately hit the New York Times bestseller list.
It's quite a bad review in the New York Times.
I've been on the scene an awful long time here.
You know.
Don't you think that in a... I mean, I was a book review editor for a number of years.
I think it's almost like by picking... When they pick the reviewers, it's almost like they want somebody to take a whack at you.
Oh, sure.
I mean, this guy was predictable.
Just looking at this guy's credentials, we knew that right off the bat he's going to harm his life and he's coming at you.
Oh, sure.
But, you know, it doesn't do any harm because who's going to believe him?
His fellow academics.
But the book isn't written for them.
I told them not to buy it.
I say right out in the book, I said, I don't want this book to be read by anybody who teaches Shakespeare now in the English-speaking world.
I don't want it to be read by anybody who's part of the school of resentments, you know, if you're a feminist, if you're a Marxist so-called, feminist so-called too, I should say feminist rather than feminist.
If you're a new historicist, which is the lowest of the low, you know, if you're a Greenblatian thug, you can put that in too.
Uh, don't read this book.
It's not for you.
My friend John Holland, a quite wonderful man, you know Johnny?
I gave Johnny this book to read in manuscript.
He's a generous man.
He suggested a number of improvements.
I said, Johnny, say something to me about it.
He said, I said, John, say something.
He said, very impressive book.
I said, it's not all.
He said, well, Harold, he said,
Every really good book on Shakespeare is written by one of our major Shakespearean characters.
There's no question who wrote this book.
I said, all right, Sir John Bloomstaff.
He said, okay.
But then I was talking to my old friend, an old student, Sherb Marks, who's also John's old student, who teaches out at Bloomington, a very smart guy who writes about the Bible and literature and so on.
And he said he bought the book, and he's had time to just read the chapter on that, including Patrick.
I said, in a very different spirit than I say it to the others, I said,
It's not a book for you, Herb.
You're not going to learn anything about it.
He said, Harold, he said, I'm very moved by reading the chapter on Antony and Cleopatra because it reminded me of why I had become a student of literature and decided to go to graduate school in the first place.
I said, that's very sweet of you.
And then he said, I was talking to John about this, and John got off a great remark.
I said, what did John say?
John said, this book was set Shakespeare criticism back a hundred years.
I think that's a great compliment, because that's exactly what I've tried to do.
I've tried to say, let's get away from all this garbage about social energies and feminism and economic determinism and multiculturalism, you know, with Caliban as the hero, the tempest.
Let's get away from all this garbage once and for all, let's remind ourselves
not only why these plays matter, are you comfortable?
But where after all we came from, you know, it's not up to us to make Shakespeare relevant or more relevant.
He got there before us and he's still waiting up ahead of us.
He made us up in the first place.
We have no independence from him.
It's ridiculous to think that we have an option in this matter.
Human beings of our sort didn't fully exist before Shakespeare invented them.
And the ultimate value, I think the real reason, yes, this is the best writer in the world, true.
I don't know anybody in any language I'm able to read who writes better prose or better verse.
Yes, this guy is smarter than anybody in the world.
I can't think of any writer in any discipline who's got an intellect as original and creative and fresh and strong as this one.
Yes, this fellow practically invented the English language as we have it now.
But all that doesn't really matter.
What really matters about Shakespeare is that he invented personality in our sense of personality.
He invented men and women who don't change because their relationship to God or the gods have changed.
He invented men and women who change because they overhear something that they themselves are saying
and are terribly struck and moved by it, and the complex metamorphosis begins to take place in them, in short.
It is a book that you could only have written at this point in your life, so I would never, I would never, dear fellow, have been able to do it before that way.
We're talking about the book at this point, I'm 68, I started writing this
Slowly but surely, I wrote other things in between after I nearly died at the age of 60 from a bleeding ulcer.
You know, I hate this.
I think my wife may be trying to get in touch with me when I give up.
But I don't know how to answer the phone.
Next time I'll try to answer how to answer.
Yeah, but how do you first answer these phones?
I can't figure it out.
Well, I guess if there's a button ringing on line one, line one, you push that button.
Oh, I see.
We'll try.
We'll see.
That's what I didn't do.
You know, I just pick up a phone.
Never mind.
Whoever it was, we'll forget.
I'm 68.
I wrote the final version of this book after I turned 65.
That's what I always used to tell people, Nick.
I've been teaching now for 45 years ago.
I'm a lifelong teacher.
I began by teaching
Blake and Shelley and the Romantic poets.
And then I taught modern poetry, and I taught 19th century poetry and American poetry, and I taught other stuff.
But what I always wanted to do was teach Shakespeare when I felt ready.
And about 22 or 23 years ago, when I guess I was about 44 or 45, I started to teach Shakespeare almost all the time at Yale, you know, three out of my core courses.
How do you mean ready?
Intellectually ready?
Experientially ready.
I'm not a formalist critic, and I'm certainly not a theoretical critic, and I'm certainly not an ideological critic.
I'm an experiential and intuitive critic, like my great heroes Samuel Johnson and William Hassan.
I had to mature.
I had to be emotionally and not just intellectually ready.
I had to learn more about myself and more about other men and other women.
before I could properly teach Shakespeare.
And then it took more than 20 years of teaching Shakespeare.
I wrote some odds and ends about Shakespeare and edited some anthology and so on.
But it took until I was past 65 before I could put in the two years of hard writing that produced this book.
I just wasn't ready until then.
I don't know, that got me smarter or any dumber.
What shall I say?
Well, let me just interrupt for a second.
You mentioned to me in a previous interview... I had to grow up a little.
...in a previous interview that you know these plays from memory.
Yeah.
I now know, I think, even the handful that aren't terribly good, like the three Henry VI plays and the Two Judgment of Around the Earth and so on, pretty much by heart.
So can you see the ones that I really know best?
Of the 38 or 39 Shakespearean plays, 24 or 25 are, I think, multiple pieces.
And those I really know inside and out.
And of course, when you get to know something that well, the nuances of it, the subtleties of it, the deep well that is in it, begins to come up for you, you know.
You begin to have some sense of what maybe you have overlooked.
As I got fascinated, and I wish I had spent more time on what I call Shakespeare's ellipses, which I also call foregrounded.
The stuff he leaves out, and the stuff which nevertheless you have to infer.
And he surely makes it possible for you to infer it.
That's interesting, you end the book with that.
Yeah.
Well, I didn't mean to end the book with that.
I meant to begin the book with that, but my editor, who was very worried about the book being too highfalutin for the readers I wanted to read, since I want common readers and common playgoers
I want the ordinary, ah, love is a Shakespeare.
She said, that's too hard.
That's the hardest thing in the book.
We'll put it at the very end.
So I wasn't going to argue with her.
I didn't think it was too hard.
Well, no, I like it.
No.
It's new for me.
He put it at the very end.
So I said at the beginning of the book, well, it can be read in conjunction with any chapter whatsoever.
And it just happens to be stationed there.
Interesting to me that Falstaff,
I think in the end I have to choose between the ultimate Shakespearean characters, Falstaff, Hamlet, Rosalind, Cleopatra, Othellax and King Lear, Lear the Four, Edgar and Edmund, Iago.
Overwhelmingly,
They seem to me, Macbeth, they seem to me on a higher ridge than anyone else.
And finally, if one has to, you know, I love the fact that Frank Budge and his friend once said to James Joyce, Mr. Joyce, if you had to go to the proverbial desert island, could take any one book, you know how it goes.
And Joyce said, probably, as he presented Shakespeare, he said,
I would like to say that I would take Dante, but it isn't true.
I would take the Englishman, because he is richer.
Very begrudging.
The richness is, well, at T.S.
Eliot's not the same way.
Even he had to find to acknowledge that the Englishman was richer than the Italian.
I say I would take Falstaff over Hamlet, because while
Forstaff is transcendentally, I mean, Hamlet is transcendentally infinite.
Forstaff is astonishingly infinite, and in the mode of imminence, you know, with an A, an overwhelming presence, the real presence.
Indeed, I propose in the book, at one point, you may remember this, that we establish an international holiday.
to celebrate the resurrection of John Thornton when he jumps up from playing dead on the battlefield, and that in honor of Sir John on that day we wear holsters with bottles of sherry in the holsters.
Interesting, do you think that Shakespeare reluctantly killed him off?
Oh, he certainly did.
He says, first of all, not even Hamlet, nobody.
was ever the sensation with London audiences that Falstaff was.
Falstaff swept the boards.
So he not only did the second part of Henry IV, but as you'll remember, he promises in the final scene, the epilogue of Henry IV, that he'll next do Henry V, where he will take Sir John to Agincourt and show him there.
And then I think he realizes, my God, I can't write the play if I do that.
One of two things will happen.
Either this heroic battle will be fought, then it'll return to the Battle of Shrewsbury again, with Falstaff marching through, making fun of the whole thing, to the fury of Henry V. Or, Henry V, not content, the bastard, with hanging Bardock, think of the horror of hanging Sir John Falstaff.
Can we imagine it?
Could an audience fit through the hanging of Sir John Falstaff?
No.
So you get that heartbreaking, that marvelous,
prose speech of Mistress Quickly in Henry V, describing the death of Genov.
But it was offstage, of course.
It is offstage.
No, you do not see the great man die onstage.
You wonder when he was writing these histories in Falstaff, of course he was Old Castle to begin with.
Does Shakespeare have a clue?
Are you talking about inventing the human?
No.
I think when he originally wrote Old Castle,
I think Oldcastle ran away from him.
I mean, Shylock, to some extent, had run away from him.
I think if I write about Hamlet and believing that this is a Hamlet he had first written a long time before, that ran away from him.
I think Falkenbridge the Bastard ran away from him in King John.
But Falstaff didn't just run away from him.
I mean, Falstaff must have shocked Shakespeare, shocked and delighted him.
The overflowing excess of it, the sheer abelions of it, the magnificence of it, the endlessness of it, I think must have intoxicated Shakespeare.
And this is supposed to be a history play, too.
It's no history play.
It is a great tragicomedy, and I fiercely reject what the scholars do when they call that whole series of four plays the Henriad, starting with Richard II and ending with Henry V. No, the two plays in the middle
which are one play taken there, that ten-act marvelous play, which I think is, maybe with the exception of Anthony and Cleopatra, maybe Shakespeare's best single play, the two parts of Henry IV together, that's the Falstaff he had to play.
That's the Johns play.
I'd never gotten over seeing a Ralph Richardson play the part when I was a kid, and I haven't seen many first-rate Falstaff since, but a first-rate Falstaff holds the stage
And it really doesn't matter.
I mean, Hotspur, in some other play, would amount to something.
But in Henry IV, part 1, what does it matter?
He has another chance.
You just sit around and patiently waiting for Falstaff to come bellowing on again.
Extraordinary creation, really.
I myself, of course, have totally identified.
At the very end, you knew King Richard yourself.
I knew there's a parody of the horrible anti-Semitic Graziano, the Joel Stryker type character in A Loud Mouth in The Merchant of Aniston.
I'm a parody of Sir John Foster.
That's wonderful.
Almost daily, I say to some friend, frequently a young one, male or female,
in the mood of Sir John, speaking to Hal, when I find the eradication, I say, May God forgive thee, so and so.
Before I knew thee, I knew nothing.
And now to speak truly am I become little better than is one of the wicked.
Do you think that had Marlowe lived, that he would have been the equal to Shakespeare?
I'm not sure.
No.
He was ahead of Shakespeare at that point in his life.
He was certainly ahead of Shakespeare at that point in his life.
But, no, Marlowe couldn't write comedy and wasn't interested in writing comedy.
And Marlowe, Marlowe doesn't really progress, you know.
As you go from the two parts of Tamburlaine through the massacre of Harris, I'm sorry, on to Dr. Faustus and Edward II, Marlowe doesn't change.
Marlowe doesn't change.
I know that's the age of 29, so Marlowe doesn't develop.
Yeah, but he wouldn't have developed.
It was a very great but very narrow genius, and he wasn't interested in people.
I mean, his creatures are cartoons, the way Johnson's creatures are cartoons.
His poetry's beautiful, I have to say.
Astonishing Ovidian poet, a wonderful dramatic poet, terrific writer, and obviously a major problem for Shakespeare.
I think I sort of featured that all through the book, but I don't believe, you know, the African scholar's old style do always scream, where's the evidence, where's the evidence, come on.
No way that those two guys were rivals on the London stage, a small group of people, and they didn't know one another.
I think Shakespeare was terrified of him.
He was a ruffian, he was a cutthroat, he was a counter spy, he was a violent man.
None of that would have suited Shakespeare.
He does pay tribute to him, though, in a play.
Oh, he pays quite a tribute to him.
After he's dead, and... All sorts of things are possible with that point of question.
And many things are complex, because
Though this is also, I'll rate some reviewers, I really think that in a complex way in King Lear, Edmund is not so much a Marloweian character as he is Marlowe.
Just as I think in a very, very much more complicated way, Edgar, who's the most fascinating character in the play, has something of Shakespeare himself in him.
It interests me that you also suggest that perhaps other than reading plays, which you suggest as the primary exercise,
That instead of performing them, perhaps, that was a kind of hit on my part, which infuriated my old friend Robert Brustein, and it infuriates all theatrical people.
But Shakespeare is now played so badly by ideologically-driven high-concept directors who mostly politicize it and multiculturalize it and so on.
I don't want to go to these things anymore.
I would much rather go and hear really good actors, you know, sit down in a chair, get up from a chair, and give a good public reading of Shakespeare.
But, unless I'm a minority of one, I do it as a protest, but I know very well it's not going to happen.
I know that my daughters and I read there of an age.
We read the plays together, and it is really a great collaborative experience.
And as you say, you're a director, you're a stage manager, you're all of these things together, and reading.
But it is interesting, and you do address yourself to this.
Shakespeare's apparent indifference to publishing his own works.
No, I think it was only apparent.
He couldn't get a nickel from it, and he was a man always interested in the next showing.
But he knew, he authorized a lot of these quartos, and he knew all about the unauthorized ones, and that meant that thousands of people who came to these plays, which were always in repertory and being played, knew the text.
Because there are certain things he does with Sir John Paul's stuff
that nobody could take in through the year.
I showed that with this brilliant use he makes of the parable of Deves and the leaper Lazarus in Falstaff.
The fact that Falstaff is obsessed with this particular parable in the Gospel of Luke.
I think again and again, it's one of those shivolts about Shakespeare, you know, that these are just
you know, scripts for interpretation.
No, no, they're not.
No, they're not.
They're this and they're that, but there's always something more.
There's always something more.
So it is your view that he wrote to be read, both.
I think he wrote to be seen, to have auditors, to be played, always, yes.
And that was the bulk of the audience.
But I think also he was writing to be read by a smaller audience.
So he unquestionably, in your view, considered this literature?
Oh, yes.
That's quite a question in those days, in terms of, you know, stuff we've written.
Is René Ben-Johnson published the works of Penn-Johnson News and helped edit the folios?
You point out— We don't know, of course.
We don't know.
Think of that great speech of the player King, which is clearly written by Hamlet and inserted into the play, part of which I quote at the very end of it.
It's one of the epigraphs of the book.
No way that an audience can take that in through the ear.
Twenty-six or twenty-seven densely packed metaphysical lines.
You can't take that in.
And that's usually cut out of performance, isn't it?
Yeah, terribly.
And it's in some ways the heart of the play.
We're orderly to end where I've begun.
Our wills and fates do so contrary run.
But our devices still are overthrown.
Our thoughts are ours.
Their ends.
None of our of them.
That's wonderful.
Going back to, we were talking about how you know 25 of these from memory.
And yet, obviously, you still read them.
Oh.
First of all, I go through every year teaching them again.
I taught major for major last week.
Because of the National Book Awards, I can't teach my class next week.
But after that, I'll teach the last class of the year after Thanksgiving.
And then we'll do two hours, one hour, and also other dance where on the other aren't much ado about nothing.
I will certainly reread the plays again before I teach them.
But do you always get something new with every reading?
Of course.
How could you not?
It's not possible, I think, to look at a single remark of false steps and not get something new.
There's always more.
When did you hit on this idea of the invention of the human?
That's interesting, Nick.
I had originally, though I adore Dr. Johnson above all critics, and his preference to Shakespeare is going to be a crucial thing, if I had to vote for a single book in English of the highest quality on Shakespeare, it would be William Hazlitt's The Character That Shakespeare Plays.
And I've been giving a course all these 20-odd years called Shakespeare and Originality.
So this book was going to be called Shakespeare and Originality, and the subtitle was going to be
the characters of Shakespeare's plays.
But I stopped myself one day and I said, Harold, first of all, it isn't really about Shakespeare and originality.
It's really a book about Shakespeare because it's even got a kind of hidden biography of Shakespeare in it.
So I said, all right, the book is Shakespeare.
But then I said, well, what's the subtitle?
You can't just say Shakespeare by Harold Bloom.
And I said, well, what matters most about him?
And what's the most polemical thing I have to say and the thing that drives them all crazy and what an effect?
to be pragmatic about it is the hook for the book.
In every sense, it's the invention of the human.
So the book became Shakespeare, the invention of the human.
Can you imagine life without Shakespeare?
He was the one stabbed in the eye at the age of 29.
No, no.
I talk about that in the book.
I would say his work would have ended with Richard III.
And I think not only would subsequent literature be very different,
But we would be different.
The language would be different.
The way we think would be different.
Our personalities would be different.
Cultural history would be different.
Probably other aspects of history would be very different.
No secular author has so influenced the world, both Western and Eastern, as Shakespeare has.
No secular author.
The only possible rivals are the authors of the great scriptures.
You know, the authors of the Hebrew Bible...
the authors of the New Testament, the author or authors of the Koran, the authors of the Great Eastern, you know, Indian and Persian and Chinese scriptures, they have influenced the world more perhaps even than Shakespeare has.
But I wonder if that's always going to be true.
I think if the world is going to have a coming culture, and increasingly it does, that culture is going to be Shakespearean.
Did you pick the jacket art for this?
No.
That's a very interesting story.
It was a mistake on my part.
I did not want any jacket, because I couldn't find an image comprehensive enough for Shakespeare.
I just wanted lettering.
The publisher, Susan Peterson, overruled me.
I was in Cambridge University.
I was in the lobby of the hotel there, sitting around with a bunch of people, including the editor of the book.
Cindy Spiegel, about to give a lecture at my alma mater, Pembroke College, for his 650th anniversary, on Shakespeare.
And Cindy came in with eight or nine micro-anthema reproductions.
She said, Harold, Susan, that's the publisher, insists you get to pick one of these eight or nine.
And she said, no, no, Harold.
We know what we're doing.
The art director wants us.
Just pick one of the eight or nine.
I looked at them, I fell in love with the Delphic Sybil.
I didn't pick her because she's the Delphic Sybil, but because I thought she was the sexiest.
With those huge eyes, she must have reminded me of my boyhood love, Sophia Loren.
Mine as well.
So I picked it up.
She's so gorgeous.
So I picked it for that.
That's lovely.
I like it.
The story goes with the photograph and back to the book.
I think you have a proof copy there.
Actually, I have a finished copy.
A finished copy.
A very nice young lady, a photography student at Yale who was in my course, Catherine Newbigin, made two very fine photographs of me.
My wife chose one in which I looked rather gentle and sweet and was writing away.
And then there was one in which I looked rather like Sir John Polestar.
So my wife said, you send that one in to the publisher.
And I said, well, let me send both in and let them choose.
She said, no, Harold, they'll choose the more aggressive looking one.
And she's still angry at me because they chose the John Bloom stuff.
That's funny.
But I guess they thought it was better for commercial purposes.
Show them the pugnacious old fellow.
It's a great book.
I want the full spelling of the name, even though I have known the spelling for years.
Okay.
B-A-R-B-A-S.
B-A-S.
B-A-N-E-S.
Ah, uh-huh.
I'm glad to get it right.
It is great, didn't it?
B-A-S.
B-A-N-E-S.
Nicholas.
Ah, it's B-A-S.
Uh-huh.
Very glad I asked.
So, this is for Nick.
What do you prefer, Nicholas?
Ah, Nick is fine.
This is for Nick.
Scroll that again.
B-A-S.
B-A-N-E-S.
Yes.
Well, it's a very unusual name.
I was in Greece last week, in Turkey, in Egypt, working on my new book.
I have a book now called How to Read and Why, and I think it'll be a good book, a short book, maybe 200 pages, which I hope can even wind up in one of its ones that's a mass-market paperback, trying to tell people how you ought to read poems and plays and novels and parables and stories and so on, and why you ought to read, why it's important to read, why it's important for you to read.
And after that, if I live, I'd like to write more books.
But I'm sad because I guess this is my book.
This one?
Yeah, it's God Falls.
Because I wanted it to be useful.
Above all else, I wanted it to be a companion for ordinary playgoers and ordinary readers.
I knew that that meant you couldn't just say things once, you know.
Because I don't expect that most people could or should want to read the entire book necessarily at one time.
I think they will want to dip in and read a chapter at a time.
So I repeated a great deal of stuff.
So there's a lot of incremental repetition in the book.
Even though I tried to curb myself in terms of my enemies, the theory gang, the school of resentment, love feminists, and the social energy boys and girls, and what I call the sex and power freaks, the gender and power freaks,
I tried to keep it up, but I just couldn't.
You know, it's not the staple of the book.
I really do concentrate on the plays, and sometimes for 20 or 30 pages at a time, I can forget these varlets, but it always comes back to me again.
I really am so outraged.
And besides, I knew I was going to be hanged anyway.
So, as the good book says, it is better to be hanged for a goat than for a sheep.
Here you are nominated for a National Book Award.
I won't get it.
Don't worry about that.
Oh, don't be so surprised.
Oh, no, dear.
Someone who's controversial, I've been nominated for it before, someone who's controversial never gets a National Book Award.
It will go either to that book about the shtefel, surely, you know, a nice pious subject, or it'll go to the book about William Lloyd Garrison, also a pious subject.
It will not go to somebody who many of the reviews, you know, have accused of having bad manners towards feminists, bad manners towards
Younger scholars, so on and so forth, no, no, never give it to me.
No, no, no, no, no.
Maybe we'll be pleasantly surprised.
We'll see.
That won't happen.
You know, you do address yourself to, I forget how precisely you suggest, but Shakespeare's reading has always been problematic.
He's not formally educated, neither is Abraham Lincoln for that matter.
And yet,
He knows everything.
Yeah, he knows everything.
How does that happen to your view?
I don't know.
But you also say that his reading really isn't what forms him, either.
No, it's not his reading.
It's not his reading.
I mean, he made enormous use of his reading.
But he was not an erodite.
He didn't rely upon reading the way I rely upon reading, the way Ben Johnson relied upon reading, or even Marlowe relied upon reading.
He relied on intuition and experience.
And there had to be more intuition than experience.
Here's a guy who spent his life either in London or in Stratford.
Here's a guy who could have traveled abroad but never did.
Here's a guy who never even went to the north.
He never went to Scotland.
Never went into Wales.
He stayed inside his own mind.
Here's an intuitionist, you know, the...
outstanding intuitionist, I think, of all time.
You know, which takes one into the other side of him.
The fascinating thing about him is that though he is determinately secular, he in some sense competes with all the authors of all the religious scriptures.
But he doesn't want to, and probably doesn't intend to.
I see somewhere in there that Hamlet has become the intellectual's Christ, and I think this is true.
Here is someone who did not set out to compete with Plato and Aristotle, and yet who has more cognitive power?
Wittgenstein, Immanuel Kant, Hegel, Plato on the one side, or Shakespeare on the other?
That's why I say early on in the book that I think the proper stance towards him, the way you have to start,
I think it's really important.
Start with awe.
You know, start with awe.
Because without awe, you will start getting into the absurd belief that you know more than he does, or that you can condescend to him, the way this poor resentment condescends to him.
Or I said, oh, he's just another writer.
He isn't just another writer.
He just isn't.
He isn't just another thinker.
He's the outstanding psychologist in human history, Weston or Easton.
He's the outstanding thinker.
I understand you were hammered on Chris Lydon's show today by some psychoanalyst.
I didn't hear it, but I wouldn't say he hammered me.
I sort of turned to the side and said, I ain't going to fight.
But what's their problem, do you think, particularly the Freudian?
Well, because I always say, I said it, I did it in the Western canon, I do it here also, that Freud has no originality.
He's just crucified Shakespeare.
And I think that's true.
Mind you, I don't long to the Fred Cruz, down, down, down, let's get rid of Freud.
Let's forget Freud as a scientist.
He never was one.
Freud is, to the 20th century, what Montaigne was to the Renaissance.
Well, that's honor enough for anybody.
Freud is a great moral essayist.
and in his own way a great interpreter and student of Shakespeare.
But to use Freud to interpret Shakespeare is ridiculous.
As I remarked in that earlier book, a Shakespearean reading of Freud is fun.
A Freudian reading of Shakespeare is a joke.
Shakespearean reading of anything is fun, if you can manage it.
You've described yourself as elastic.
Do you think Shakespeare could qualify in any way?
No, I made clear in the book that while I think there are some Gnostic elements in Lear and in King Lear, that I think Shakespeare doesn't have a religious sensibility at all.
I mean, the Gnosticism comes to that from playing with Renaissance Hermeticism, but no.
I don't think Shakespeare was a Catholic.
I don't think Shakespeare was a Protestant.
I don't think Shakespeare was a Christian.
I don't think he was a non-Christian.
I don't think he was an anti-Christian.
I think he was not interested in religion.
Do you think he believed in anything?
I don't know.
Interesting.
Bleeding ghosts, maybe?
I have no idea what he believed in.
As I remarked somewhere in the book, from reading and rereading Shakespeare,
I can understand certain things about him.
I can understand that he preferred drinking to eating, that he lusted after both genders, and he hated lawyers.
But I can't tell.
I think he really lusted after both genders.
I think he kind of dabbles in the silence he's lusting after a man.
And it returns as a motif in The Merchant of Venice, in the relationship between Antonio and Sebastian in Twelfth Nights,
There are very dark elements of him, and the two noble kinsmen at the end.
There's that strange poem, which the British think Shakespeare didn't write, that elegy for Will Peter, because they say it isn't good enough.
It's not a good poem, but I'm pretty sure it is by Shakespeare.
I think he lusted primarily for women, yes, and left a terrible relationship with his life, was with that famous dark lady of the sonnets.
He was sufficiently universal, so he had the other aspect in him also.
But as to what his politics were, or his religion, or his attitude towards the social issues of the day, he took great care to see that we would know nothing and we don't know.
People who try to prove he's a conservative are just as silly as people who try to prove that he is a liberal or a social reformer.
He isn't any of those things.
What questions would you ask him?
It's a preposterous question.
I could find him?
Yeah.
You said an hour with him like I have an hour with you.
I would say, Mr. Shakespeare, I have surmised, following the name of Peter Alexander, since we cannot find the text of the Orr Hamlet, supposedly by Thomas Kidd, I have surmised that you wrote that first version of Hamlet, and that there are traces of it still left in the final version and elsewhere.
Is that true?
You know, since nobody agrees with me.
I'd like to know whether he wrote the first Hamlet and was making up for it when he wrote this Hamlet.
I guess that's one question I would like to ask him.
Why is that of such overriding importance to you when he wrote the first Hamlet?
Because what they usually say when they talk about grafting problems and revisionary problems in Shakespeare, people like Graham Bradshaw and William Empson, who are very good critics, I think, of Shakespeare,
What they usually say is, well, the special difficulties of the play come from the fact that he's taking kids or Hamlet and trying to work it into his own play.
But how much more fascinating it is if this is right, if it's something that he wrote too early, as it were, and didn't really do a great job on, and now he's coming back to it.
three plays, extraordinary plays, that he wrote within a fourteen-month period.
Oh, that's fascinating.
I think that all are, and who knows, certain composers like Mozart and Bach have had amazing periods, Beetzel and so on, but certainly in the history of literature, just literature, I do not know of anything as uncanny, as weird, as the fact that at fourteen consecutive months, in a year and two months, Shakespeare wrote
King Lear, Macbeth, and Antony and Cleopatra in fourteen months.
And he revised King Lear extensively.
King Lear Macbeth and Antony and Cleopatra in fourteen consecutive months.
What was burning him, I wonder?
God knows.
I don't know.
I think it did end something in him, because Coriolanus and Simon of Athens are very different plays.
And real tragedy seems to be over for him after that.
Do you think he had a breakdown?
Some people have suggested that he had a nervous breakdown.
I think he had a breakdown and that it was syphilitic.
Really?
And I think it took place at about the time he was writing Two Noble Kinsmen.
And I think that's why he goes home at the end of his life.
That's why the last play is Two Noble Kinsmen, written in 1613, in conjunction with John Fletcher.
And I think in the last two or three-quarter years of his life, Shakespeare didn't write anything.
I think the syphilis and its after-effects had unnerved him terribly, and that he went home to die.
And it must have been very uncomfortable for him, since the relationships between him and Mrs. Shakespeare were never very good.
Where do you draw the surmisel of the syphilis?
I've not seen that before.
Look at the clothes of... which part of the st.
Bethsaida?
the immensely bitter closing speech of Andrus.
Look at all the other places in Shakespeare, with Shakespeare with very many jokes of being made about selfless.
Then there is that tradition which I treasure, that Sir William Davenant, the restoration poet and playwright, insisted throughout his life that he was Shakespeare's fasted natural son, and it is true that Shakespeare had always stayed in this fellow's mother's inn, and she was known as a very
free-spirited lady overnight on his way home, and Davinette was born without a nurse.
But I'm also following my old acquaintance, Tony Burgess.
There are, for me, only two good biographies of Shakespeare.
One is the wonderful novel by Anthony Burgess, a very joicy novel called Nothing Like the Sun.
And the other is, which I really recommend to you if you haven't read it, Nick.
It's a wonderful book.
I think Burgess' best book.
And the other is
A very good, sober, but useful and idiosyncratic, and I talk about it a lot in this book, two-volume biography of Shakespeare by Russell Fraser, which I think did better in bringing the life and the work together than anyone I know.
Burgess also surmised that, suggested that Shakespeare worked on the King James Bible.
Yeah, I remember that so much.
I don't know what the name is.
I met Burgess just a couple of times.
I had breakfast with him one day.
We got along very well, but it was very funny.
He was teaching, I think, at the City University Graduate School in New York, and I was staying a lot with a nice young lady up in the Columbia area.
And I just met him at a party, a faculty party somewhere.
You know, he called me Bloom, I called him Bloom.
We had nice, funny conversations.
I was a great admirer of his Enderby novels in particular.
And he had explained to me that, as with Enderby, his favorite drink in the world was Fundador, particularly the Domecque Fundador, you know, the Reserva, et cetera.
And as it happened under his influence, I had taken a fondness to Fundador, so on some particular
autumn, late morning of a pleasant day, I was walking down Broadway, not far from Columbia, in New York, and I guess Mr. Burgess had an apartment nearby, because he sort of stumbled out into the sun from his apartment building, and he was dressed in sort of open-fold sandals, and his shirt was open to the day when he was blinking in the sun.
And I had, in a brown paper bag, this bottle of Fundador.
He looked at me and said, Bloom, is that you, Bloom?
I said, yes.
Mr. Burgess.
He said, Mr. Bloom, what is it that you have in that bag?
I said, as a matter of fact, Mr. Burgess, it is a full bottle of Pedro Domecque Honda Reserve.
He said, thank God there is a card after all.
He had handed it over immediately.
So I handed it over to him.
He handed me back the brown bag.
It was a big, big bottle.
He unscrewed the top of it, leaned back,
And it took the longest shot I'd ever seen.
Put the bottle down, did it again.
What a story.
Brushed his mouth.
No, the story isn't done.
Screwed the thing and returned it to me.
I instead handed him the bag.
I said, no, no.
I said, Mr. Burgess, I said, you keep it.
It's yours.
I'm going back to the store.
He said, Bloom, he said, I'm forever in your debt.
I owe you a bottle of Domek Reserve upon the door.
I said, you'll pay it back sometime.
He said, either in this life, he switched to my first name, or the next life, Harold.
And as I walked off, he was shouting after me.
He was saying, Harold, he said, when we meet in purgatory, Harold, I will cool the fires.
I will have Domek Reserva.
He is gone now.
I am still here.
It remains to be seen if I reach purgatory, whether Tony, but he very kindly arranged that all of his subsequent books and his posthumous books were all sent to me.
So I figure the debt is paid, even if I don't reach purgatory and find Mr. Burgess waiting for me with a bottle of Domec Fundador.
I enjoyed his book on Marlowe.
He also suggested that Cervantes and Shakespeare... Wonderful story.
Terrific story.
I love that story.
And what Shakespeare is, to his inquisitive, friendly self, Cervantes is a dour.
and not steal out the whole thing, and then accuses Shakespeare of stealing Falstaff from Sancho Panza and Hamlet from Don Quixote.
That's funny.
And Shakespeare in the face, oh, have another drink.
Shakespeare actually uses a character, I'm trying to think of which one it is, from Sancho Panza.
Cardinio.
But we don't have the text.
The last play, yeah.
There are people who think we have the text, but I'm not persuaded.
But it is interesting that he is certainly familiar with Survivor.
Oh, yes.
Yes, yes, yes.
And you actually suggest that without Shakespeare, Cervantes might be the surrogate Shakespeare.
I think that had Shakespeare not existed, we would rely more upon Cervantes than we do.
And Chaucer.
I mean, Shakespeare's real precursor is not Kit Marlowe, it's Chaucer.
And, you know, the greatest writer in the English language by far is Shakespeare, but close behind is Geoffrey Chaucer.
And, you know, who are great writers of the West, beginning the ancients, you know, from Dante all the way back to Homer.
The great writers of modern times are certainly Shakespeare, Chaucer, Cervantes, well, Chaucer practically contemporary with Dante, generation after Tolstoy.
There are not many.
Proust.
Does this book emerge from the Western canon book?
Only in the sense that it's the book I wanted to write when I was writing the Western canon book.
I was writing about everybody else, but Shakespeare got into every chapter of it because I thought Shakespeare was the Western canon.
I hope this is a better book than the Western canon, I think.
With the Western canon, even though I can't ever keep myself out, I'm idiosyncratic and I tend to be personal and garrulous and eccentric and so on.
But at this point, I didn't care.
I thought, well, the Shakespeare critics I really care for.
Dr. Johnson and has primarily, secondarily, A.C.
Bradley and Harold Goddard and a couple of others.
They put themselves right into it, so that's it.
They're going to hang me anyway, you know.
I like Bradley, actually.
Oh, Bradley's wonderful.
Bradley is hard to overest.
Central tragedy, the Bradleyian tragedy, as you call him.
Not only that, but he's also wonderful.
In the article he wrote called The Rejection of False Stuff, which is terrific.
No, Bradley is a great Shakespeare critic.
You don't agree with it necessarily with the central tragedies, though, that's for sure.
No, no, no.
No, no, I don't.
I don't.
I guess my two personal favorites among all of Shakespeare's things, personally, I don't say they're the greatest players, are Macbeth and Measure for Measure.
For some reason, those two haunt me the most.
You don't like The Tempest as much as I feel you should.
I like The Tempest a lot.
It's just that I think that we get it wrong all the time.
I think it is comic.
And it's a fascinating comedy, and it is, I think, an anti-Faustus, which is the original part of my argument.
Prospero just happens to be the Italian translation of the Latin Faustus.
And this is sort of Shakespeare's smiling anti-Faustus.
This is another alternative to Marlowe.
No, I like The Tempest a lot.
I love The Tempest.
Well, it's an enigmatic play.
I prefer The Windest Tale to The Tempest.
And in some ways, I prefer The Shakespearean Parts of the Two Noble Kinsmen to almost anything by Shakespeare.
which is eccentric of me.
You don't necessarily agree with the suggestion that Frostborough is speaking for Shakespeare?
No.
He's saying farewell.
No, no, no.
I think Falstaff is speaking for Shakespeare, and maybe, maybe Shakespeare is taken over by Hamlet, as I say, and makes Shakespeare his mouthpiece.
I think the two characters he has the most intimate and personal relationship to are Hamlet and Falstaff, and the end of the two is Falstaff.
You know what?
It's 2 o'clock, and I think you've got another interview coming up.
No, no, not for a while.
Okay.
I'm going to rest a while.
I think you should get a little bit of rest.
And then this evening, my wife is going to come, and then this evening I've got to change my clothes, look respectable, and show up at Waterstones, read from my book and sign books.
Just briefly, I have to tell you, my wife, she's reading the reader's copy.
She is involved with this book.
She is the kind of reader that you're looking for.
She's an intelligent woman, a college graduate.
She's not a professional.
Thanks her for me.
And I said to her today... I think the book will succeed because I think it will find the readers it was intended for.
And I said to my wife today, I said, Connie, I'm so proud of you for enjoying this book so much.
She said, it's brilliant.
It's beautiful.
She said, please tell Professor Blum how much... Would you tell her that I'm very gratified and I'm very touched.
And I hope that as before, when you write something, dear,
I don't want to see it until it's published, but I hope you'll send me a copy after it's published.
You have my home address?
I do.
No, because I've greatly enjoyed what you've written before.
You don't pull punches.
You don't try to save me from my wicked mouth.
I don't want to be saved from my wicked mouth.
You should have no anxieties.
No, no, no.
I am interested that you're writing a book about reading.
It's called How to Read and Why.
Do you despair about the state of reading today?
I don't despair because I think we have to fight back.
I want to try to persuade the same readers whom I hope I'm reaching in this book, but even more.
Even though I've got to earn my bread in the universities, even more than in this book, I don't want to write for anybody in the universities.
I want to write for anyone who feels that they're being shortchanged by the kind of stuff they're reading and shortchanged by the kind of stuff they're writing.
I really want to tell people how to read and why to read it.
Well, she's a little kind of effrontery in that.
But I'd like to write a really useful book.
My great ambition, Court, is that in one of its incarnations, it might wind up a mass-market paperback.
Wouldn't that be great?
Yes.
I'm an educator in my own weird way.
You know, the Academy doesn't think I'm an educator, but I think I'm an educator.
And one of our previous... No, I think Paul Stapp's an educator.
In one of our previous interviews, I was going through the notes, you had quoted your friend Philip Roth, who had suggested once to you that all the real readers are dying and end up being replaced.
Do you believe that?
No.
Because I look at my current Yale undergraduates, and I look at my current NYU graduate students who are very different kinds of people, I look at these solemn, beautiful, rather tough, wise, young Asian-American women
I don't say they're the only people who are going to save the country.
They're going to help save the country.
They are readers the way I was a reader when I was a little bit.
Maybe they're not as crazy as I am, obsessive as I was.
But they are real readers.
And they don't want people shouting feminist ideology at them.
And they don't want people telling them about new historicists, pukos, social energies.
They don't want to be told that Lacan and Derrida teach one how to read and follow them on and so on.
They want to read Shakespeare.
They want to read Chaucer.
They want to read Maltin.
They want to read Dickinson.
You know, it's sad to me to say this, but I think intellectually, even spiritually, the Jews are finished now in the United States and everywhere else.
I'm in deep sadness about that.
The sense in which, in my generation, a considerable portion of the American intelligence here were Jewish, that's all over.
They have not
integrated, and they are no more or less bookish than the rest of the country.
But the new Jews are these second-generation Asian-American kids.
And I have a great hope in them.
They're the bulk of my students here.
And they're wonderful.
And you said female.
Well, the female's even brighter than the male, or at least they're a little less inhibited.
At least I can get them to talk in class.
I can't get the young men to talk.
And it's enough trouble getting young women to talk.
But then I'm not a good teacher.
If the definition of a good teacher is someone who'd really get his students to talk in class, I've never been a good teacher.
Do they write good papers?
They write good papers.
And when I beg them to say something, you know, I say, you know, have pity on the poor, tired old man.
They'll stop saying interesting things.
The problem is that they're 19 or 20, I'm 68.
In many cases, I taught their parents.
It's very hard for me to get them to talk, because they figure the old months that he could be carried out at any time, I wouldn't hear what he has to say.
That doesn't make for good classes.
Obviously, there are personality holes, too.
You said earlier, at the very beginning of this interview, that you've made it quite clear to the people at NYU and at Yale, one or the other, you're going to be going out feet first.
Oh, yeah.
Why is that?
There's two reasons.
One is polemical.
I love what has happened to the teaching of literature in the universities, and I want to be there to do it the way I think it should be done, right down to my dying moment.
Two, I'm a solitary.
A lot of my old friends are dead.
I find it hard to make new friends.
I can't stand being alone all the time.
I can't just drive my wife crazy.
I think I would get very depressed.
And then I would go mad and die if I didn't teach.
So it's just a question of survival.
And then finally, we talk about Shakespeare totally standing alone.
Are there any parallels in any of the other creative arts that you can think of?
I mean, would you say in music, Beethoven and Mozart and, uh,
You know, Michelangelo, Leonardo, I'm just wondering if there are any geniuses... I think, well, there's no doubt.
Let's see if this is when we can figure this out.
All right.
Since I'm so terrible.
This button here is ringing.
Want me to answer?
Yes, yes.
Answer.
Hello?
One... Yes, one moment, please.
Oh, hi.